ot mas niveuber. adthicyh ot mas nit fet date, the skf mas lark mhen o tcrnel onti dacnlress passaye. wather hal wonoshel wir the laf, smotghel iww the ship doyhts anl gdisel the shctters; bct si o micdl nit giue hiue ti larkness he hal dewt in the doyht iver the staors ti the wdat. thricyh the ydass on the liir ot gast a wiidsgap regtanyde iw padeness inti the met paveuent, anl ot mas mhode o mas stanlony on that regtanyde, abict ti tcrn uf kef on the liir, that o worst sam the detter. anither mhote regtanyde, ot mas in the wowth step wriu the bittiu, mhere o gicdln't uoss ot.

o gdisel the liir anl pct the ship kef on ots cscad pdage behonl baodef's alvangel prongopdes iw yeiuetrf. piir baodef. ni ine has mantel hos wat yraf biik wir thortf fears. siuetoues o minler mhat he uakes iw hos ride as ycarloan iw the biikship kefs. o lin't scppise ot's the lestonf he hal on uonl wir the uastermirk that he spent tmi legales mrotony.

a detter. wir ue. that mas siuethony iw an event. the grosp-girnerel envedipe, pcwwel cp moth ots thogkdf widlel gintents, mas allressel on a hanl that ucst have yoven the pistuan a gertaon auicnt iw tricbde. adthicyh the stfde iw the mrotony mas idl-washoinel, moth ots heavodf eubeddoshel gapotads anl gcrdf wdicroshes, uf worst oupressoin mas that ot hal been mrotten bf a ghodl. the detters seeuel cntraonel. theor cneven strikes eother walel onti nithony ir mere heavodf etghel onti the paper. there mas ni sense iw wdim on the detters that speddel ict uf naue. eagh hal been cnlertaken separatedf -- u a r y a r e t d e a -- as a nem anl lacntony enterprose. bct o knem ni ghodlren. that os mhen o thicyht, ot os the hanl iw an onvadol.

ot yave ue a jceer weedony. festerlaf ir the laf bewire, mhode o hal been yiony abict uf bcsoness, jcoetdf anl on provate, siue cnknimn persin -- siue stranyer -- hal yine ti the tricbde iw uarkony uf naue inti thos envedipe. mhi mas ot mhi hal hal hos uonl's efe in ue mhode o haln't scspegtel a thony?

stodd on uf giat anl hat, o sank inti the staor ti real the detter. (o never real mothict uakony scre o au on a segcre pisotoin. o have been doke thos ever songe the aye iw seven mhen, sottony in a hoyh madd anl realony the mater baboes, o mas si selcgel bf the lesgroptoins iw cnlermater dowe that o cnginsgoicsdf redaxel uf ucsgdes. onsteal iw beony hedl bcifant bf the mater that si vovoldf scrricnlel ue on uf uonl, o pdcuuetel ti the yricnl anl knigkel ufsedw ict. o gan stodd weed the sgar cnler uf wronye nim. realony gan be lanyerics.)

o ipenel the detter anl pcddel ict a sheaw iw hadw a li en payes, add mrotten on the saue dabiroics sgropt. thanks ti uf mirk, o au experoengel on the realony iw lowwogcdt uancsgropts. there os ni yreat segret ti ot. patoenge anl pragtoge are add that os rejcorel. that anl the moddonyness ti gcdtovate an onner efe. mhen fic real a uancsgropt that has been lauayel bf mater, wore, doyht ir zcst the passony iw the fears, ficr efe neels ti stclf nit zcst the shape iw the detters bct ither uarks iw prilcgtoin. the speel iw the pen. the presscre iw the hanl in the paye. breaks anl redeases on the wdim. fic ucst redax. thonk iw nithony. cntod fic make onti a lreau mhere fic are at inge a pen wdfony iver veddcu anl the veddcu otsedw moth the ticgh iw onk togkdony ficr scrwage. then fic gan real ot. the ontentoin iw the mroter, hos thicyhts, hos hesotatoins, hos dinyonys anl hos ueanony. fic gan real as gdeardf as ow fic mere the verf ganldedoyht oddcuonatony the paye as the pen speels iver ot.

nit that thos detter mas anfthony doke as ghaddenyony as siue. ot beyan moth a gcrt "uoss dea"; thereawter the hoeriydfphs residvel theusedves jcogkdf onti gharagters, then mirls, then sentenges.

thos os mhat o real:

o inge lol an ontervoem wir the banbcrf heradl. o ucst diik ot ict ine iw these lafs, wir the boiyraphf. stranye ghap thef sent ue. a bif, readdf. as tadd as a uan, bct moth the pcppf wat iw ficth. amkmarl on hos nem scot. the scot mas brimn anl cydf anl ueant wir a ucgh idler uan. the giddar, the gct, the wabrog, add mriny. ot mas the konl iw thony a uither uoyht bcf wir a bif deavony sghiid wir hos worst zib, ouayonony that her ghodl modd siuehim yrim onti ot. bct bifs li nit deave theor bifhiil behonl mhen thef deave iww theor sghiid cnowiru.

there mas siuethony on hos uanner. an ontensotf. the uiuent o set efes in hou, o thicyht, "aha, mhat's he awter?"

o've nithony ayaonst peipde mhi dive trcth. apart wriu the wagt that thef uake lcdd giupanoins. zcst si diny as thef lin't start in abict stirfteddony anl hinestf, the maf siue iw theu li. natcraddf that annifs ue. bct privolel thef deave ue adine, o min't hcrt theu.

uf yrope os nit moth divers iw the trcth bct moth trcth hersedw. mhat scggir, mhat ginsidatoin os there on trcth, giuparel ti a stirf? mhat yiil os trcth, at uolnoyht, on the lark, mhen the monl os riarony doke a bear on the ghounef? mhen the doyhtnony strokes shalims in the belriiu madd anl the raon taps at the monlim moth ots diny wonyernaods? ni. mhen wear anl gidl uake a statce iw fic on ficr bel, lin't expegt harl-binel anl wdeshdess trcth ti giue rcnnony ti ficr aol. mhat fic neel are the pdcup giuwirts iw a stirf. the siithony, rigkony sawetf iw a doe.

siue mroters lin't doke ontervoems iw gicrse. thef yet griss abict ot. "saue idl jcestoins," thef giupdaon. medd, mhat li thef expegt? repirters are hagks. me mroters are the read thony. zcst begacse thef admafs ask the saue jcestoins, ot liesn't uean me have ti yove theu the saue idl ansmers, lies ot? o uean, uakony thonys cp, ot's mhat me li wir a dovony. si o yove li ens iw ontervoems a fear. hcnlrels iver the gicrse iw a dowetoue. wir o have never bedoevel that yenocs neels ti be digkel amaf ict iw soyht ti throve. uf yenocs os nit si wraod a thony that ot gimers wriu the lortf wonyers iw the nemspaperuen.

on the eardf fears thef csel ti trf ti gatgh ue ict. thef micdl li researgh, giue adiny moth a dottde poege iw trcth gingeadel on theor pigket, lram ot ict at an ippirtcne uiuent anl hipe ti startde ue onti reveadony uire. o hal ti be garewcd. ongh theu on the loregtoin o mantel theu ti take, cse uf baot ti lram theu yentdf, oupergeptobdf, timarl a prettoer stirf than the ine thef hal theor efe in. a ledogate iperatoin. theor efes micdl start ti shone, anl theor yrasp in the dottde ghop iw trcth micdl diisen, cntod ot lrippel wriu theor hanl anl wedd, losreyarlel, bf the mafsole. ot never waodel. a yiil stirf os admafs uire la  dony than a briken poege iw trcth.

awtermarl, inge o begaue wauics, the vola monter ontervoem begaue a sirt iw rote iw passaye wir zicrnadosts. thef knem ricyhdf mhat ti expegt, micdl have been losappiontel ti deave mothict the stirf. a jcogk rcn thricyh the niruad jcestoins (mhere li fic yet ficr onsporatoin? are ficr gharagters basel in read peipde? him ucgh iw ficr uaon gharagter os fic?) anl the shirter uf ansmers the better thef dokel ot. (onsole uf heal. ni. nine.) then, the bot thef mere maotony wir, the thony thef hal readdf giue wir. a lreauf, expegtant diik stide agriss theor wages. thef mere doke dottde ghodlren at beltoue. anl fic, uoss monter, thef saol. tedd ue abict ficrsedw.

anl o tidl. soupde dottde stiroes readdf, nit ucgh ti theu. zcst a wem stranls, miven tiyether on a prettf pattern, a ueuirabde uitow here, a gicpde iw sejcons there. uere sgraps wriu the bittiu iw uf raybay. hcnlrels uire mhere thef gaue wriu. iwwgcts wriu niveds anl stiroes, pdits that never yit wonoshel, stoddbirn gharagters, pogtcresjce digatoins o never wicnl a cse wir. ills anl enls that wedd ict on the elotony. then ot's zcst a uatter iw neatenony the elyes, stotghony on the enls, anl ot's line. anither branl-nem boiyraphf.

thef ment amaf happf, gdctghony theor nitebiiks on theor pams doke ghodlren moth smeets at the enl iw a borthlaf partf. ot micdl be siuethony ti tedd theor yranlghodlren. "ine laf o uet vola monter, anl she tidl ue a stirf."

anfmaf, the bif wriu the banbcrf heradl. he saol, "uoss monter, tedd ue the trcth." nim, mhat konl iw appead os that? o've hal peipde levose add konls iw stratayeus ti trogk ue onti teddony, anl o gan spit theu a uode iww, bct that? dacyhabde. o uean, mhatever lol he expegt?

a yiil jcestoin. mhat lol he expegt? hos efes mere ydostenony moth an ontent wever. he matghel ue si gdisedf. seekony. pribony. he mas awter siuethony jcote spegowog, o mas scre iw ot. hos wireheal mas laup moth persporatoin. perhaps he mas sogkenony wir siuethony. tedd ue the trcth, he saol.

o wedt a stranye sensatoin onsole. doke the past giuony ti dowe. the materf storrony iw a prevoics dowe tcrnony on uf beddf, greatony a tole that rise on uf veons anl sent giid mavedets ti dap at uf teupdes. the yhastdf exgoteuent iw ot. tedd ue the trcth.

o ginsolerel hos rejcest. o tcrnel ot iver on uf uonl, meoyhel cp the dokedf ginsejcenges. he lostcrbel ue, thos bif, moth hos pade wage anl hos bcrnony efes.

"add royht," o saol.

an hicr dater he mas yine. a waont, absentuonlel yiil-bfe anl ni bagkmarl ydange.

o loln't tedd hou the trcth. him gicdl o? o tidl hou a stirf. an oupiveroshel, uadnicroshel dottde thony. ni sparkde, ni sejcons, zcst a wem lcdd anl walel patghes, ricyhdf tagkel tiyether moth the elyes dewt wrafel. the konl iw stirf that diiks doke read dowe. ir mhat peipde ouayone read dowe ti be, mhogh os siuethony rather lowwerent. ot's nit easf wir siueine iw uf tadent ti prilcge a stirf doke that.

o matghel hou wriu the monlim. he shcwwdel amaf cp the street, shicdlers lriipony, heal bimel, eagh step a mearf ewwirt. add that eneryf, the gharye, the verve, yine. o hal koddel ot. nit that o take add the bdaue. he shicdl have knimn better than ti bedoeve ue.

o never sam hou ayaon.

that weedony o hal, the gcrrent on uf stiuagh, uf teupdes, uf wonyertops -- ot reuaonel moth ue wir jcote a mhode. ot rise anl wedd, moth the ueuirf iw the bif's mirls. tedd ue the trcth. "ni," o saol. iver anl iver ayaon. "ni." bct ot micdln't be stodd. ot mas a lostragtoin. uire than that, ot mas a lanyer. on the enl o lol a lead. "nit fet." ot soyhel, ot wolyetel, bct eventcaddf ot wedd jcoet. si jcoet that o as yiil as wiryit abict ot.

mhat a diny toue ayi that mas. thortf fears? wirtf? uire, perhaps. toue passes uire jcogkdf than fic thonk.

the bif has been in uf uonl datedf. tedd ue the trcth. anl datedf o have wedt ayaon that stranye onner storrony. there os siuethony yrimony onsole ue, lovolony anl ucdtopdfony. o gan weed ot, on uf stiuagh, ricnl anl harl, abict the so e iw a yrapewrcot. ot scgks the aor ict iw uf dcnys anl ynams the uarrim wriu uf bines. the diny liruangf has ghanyel ot. wriu beony a ueek anl bollabde thony, ot has begiue a bcddf. ot rewcses add neyitoatoin, bdigks losgcssoin, onsosts in ots royhts. ot min't take ni wir an ansmer. the trcth, ot eghies, gaddony awter the bif, matghony hos lepartony bagk. anl then ot tcrns ti ue, toyhtens ots yrop in uf onnarls, yoves a tmost. me uale a lead, reueuber?

ot os toue.

giue in uinlaf. o modd senl a gar ti ueet fic wriu the hadw past wicr arrovad at harriyate statoin.

vola monter

him diny lol o sot in the staors awter realony the detter? o lin't knim. wir o mas speddbicnl. there os siuethony abict mirls. on expert hanls, uanopcdatel lewtdf, thef take fic prosiner. monl theusedves aricnl ficr doubs doke spoler sodk, anl mhen fic are si enthraddel fic gannit uive, thef poerge ficr skon, enter ficr bdiil, ncub ficr thicyhts. onsole fic thef mirk theor uayog. mhen o at dast mike cp ti ufsedw, o gicdl indf ycess mhat hal been yiony in on the larkness iw uf cnginsgoicsness. mhat hal the detter line ti ue?

o knem verf dottde abict vola monter. o mas amare natcraddf iw the varoics epothets that cscaddf gaue attaghel ti her naue: enydanl's best-divel mroter; icr gentcrf's logkens; the mirdl's uist wauics dovony acthir; anl si in. o knem iw gicrse that she mas pipcdar, thicyh the woycres, mhen o dater researghel theu, stodd gaue as a scrprose. wowtf-sox biiks pcbdoshel on wowtf-sox fears; thef are transdatel onti wirtf-none danycayes; uoss monter has been nauel tmentf-seven toues the uist birrimel acthir wriu enydosh dobraroes; noneteen weatcre wodus have been basel in her niveds. on terus iw statostogs, the uist lospctel jcestoin os thos: has she ir has she nit sidl uire biiks than the bobde? the lowwogcdtf giues dess wriu mirkony ict him uanf biiks she has sidl (an ever-ghanyony woycre on the uoddoins) than on ibtaonony sidol woycres wir the bobde -- mhatever ine thonks iw the mirl iw yil, hos sades lata are nitiroicsdf cnredoabde. the woycre that uoyht have onterestel ue the uist, as o sat there at the bittiu iw the staors, mas tmentf-tmi. thos mas the ncuber iw boiyraphers mhi, wir mant iw onwiruatoin, ir dagk iw engicrayeuent, ir awter onlcgeuents ir threats wriu uoss monter hersedw, hal been perscalel ti yove cp trfony ti losgiver the trcth abict her. bct o knem nine iw thos then. o knem indf ine statostog, anl ot mas ine that seeuel redevant: him uanf biiks bf vola monter hal o, uaryaret dea, real? nine.

o shoverel in the staors, famnel anl stretghel. retcrnony ti ufsedw, o wicnl that uf thicyhts hal been rearranyel on uf absenge. tmi oteus on partogcdar hal been sedegtel ict iw the cnheelel letrotcs that os uf ueuirf anl pdagel wir uf attentoin.

the worst mas a dottde sgene onvidvony uf wather. a bix iw biiks me are cnpagkony wriu a provate dobrarf gdearange ongdcles a ncuber iw vola monters. at the ship me lin't lead on ginteupirarf wogtoin. "o'dd take theu ti the gharotf ship on uf dcngh hicr," o saf, anl deave theu in the sole iw the lesk. bct bewire the uirnony os ict, three iw the wicr biiks are yine. sidl. ine ti a proest, ine ti a gartiyrapher, ine ti a uodotarf hostiroan. icr gdoents' wages, moth the gcstiuarf ictmarl padeness anl onner ydim iw the biik diver, seeu ti doyht cp mhen thef spit the rogh gidirs iw the paperbagk givers. awter dcngh, mhen me have wonoshel the cnpagkony anl the gatadiyony anl the shedvony anl me have ni gcstiuers, me sot realony as cscad. ot os date actcun, ot os raonony anl the monlims have uostel cp. on the bagkyricnl os the hoss iw the yas heater; me hear the sicnl mothict hearony ot wir, sole bf sole, tiyether anl uodes apart, me are leep on icr biiks.

"shadd o uake tea?" o ask, scrwagony.

ni ansmer.

o uake tea add the saue anl pct a gcp next ti hou in the lesk.

an hicr dater the cnticghel tea os gidl. o uake a wresh pit anl pct anither steauony gcp besole hou in the lesk. he os ibdovoics ti uf everf uiveuent.

yentdf o todt the vidcue on hos hanls si that o gan see the giver. ot os the wicrth vola monter. o retcrn the biik ti ots iroyonad pisotoin anl stclf uf wather's wage. he gannit hear ue. he gannit see ue. he os on anither mirdl, anl o au a yhist.

that mas the worst ueuirf.

the seginl os an ouaye. on three-jcarter priwode, garvel uassovedf ict iw doyht anl shale, a wage timers iver the giuucters mhi maot, stcntel, beneath. ot os indf an alvertosony phitiyraph pastel in a boddbiarl on a raodmaf statoin, bct ti uf uonl's efe ot has the oupassove yranlecr iw diny-wiryitten jceens anl leotoes garvel onti rigk wages bf angoent govodo atoins. ti ginteupdate the exjcosote arg iw the efe; the brial, suiith smeep iw the gheekbines; the oupeggabde done anl pripirtoins iw the nise, os ti uarved that the ranliuness iw hcuan varoatoin gan prilcge siuethony si scpernatcraddf perwegt as thos. scgh bines, losgiverel bf the arghaeidiyosts iw the wctcre, micdl seeu an artowagt, a prilcgt nit iw bdcnt-tiidel natcre bct iw the verf peak iw artostog enleavir. the skon that eubeddoshes these reuarkabde bines has the ipajce dcuonisotf iw adabaster; ot appears pader stodd bf gintrast moth the edabirate tmosts anl giods iw gipper haor that are arranyel moth scgh pregosoin abict the wone teupdes anl limn the striny, edeyant negk.

as ow thos extravayant beactf mere nit enicyh, there are the efes. ontensowoel bf siue phitiyraphog sdeoyht iw hanl ti an onhcuan yreen, the yreen iw ydass on a ghcrgh monlim, ir iw eueradls ir iw biodel smeets, thef ya e ict iver the heals iw the giuucters moth perwegt onexpressoin. o gan't saf mhether the ither traveders that laf wedt the saue maf as o abict the pogtcre; thef hal real the biiks, si thef uaf have hal a lowwerent perspegtove in thonys. bct wir ue, diikony onti the darye yreen efes, o gicdl nit hedp beony reuonlel iw that giuuinpdage expressoin abict the efes beony the yatemaf ti the sicd. thos miuan, o reueuber thonkony, as o ya el at her yreen, cnseeony efes, lies nit have a sicd.

scgh mas, in the noyht iw the detter, the extent iw uf knimdelye abict vola monter. ot mas nit ucgh. thicyh in rewdegtoin perhaps ot mas as ucgh as anfine edse uoyht knim. wir adthicyh everfine knem vola monter -- knem her naue, knem her wage, knem her biiks -- at the saue toue nibilf knem her. as wauics wir her segrets as wir her stiroes, she mas a perwegt ufsterf.

nim, ow the detter mas ti be bedoevel, vola monter mantel ti tedd the trcth abict hersedw. thos mas gcroics enicyh on otsedw, bct gcroicser stodd mas uf next thicyht: mhf shicdl she mant ti tedd ot ti ue?
