ot was niveuber. adthicyh ot was nit fet date, the skf was lark when o tcrnel onti dacnlress passaye. mather hal monoshel mir the laf, swotghel imm the ship doyhts anl gdisel the shctters; bct si o wicdl nit giue hiue ti larkness he hal demt in the doyht iver the staors ti the mdat. thricyh the ydass on the liir ot gast a miidsgap regtanyde im padeness inti the wet paveuent, anl ot was whode o was stanlony on that regtanyde, abict ti tcrn uf kef on the liir, that o morst saw the detter. anither whote regtanyde, ot was in the momth step mriu the bittiu, where o gicdln't uoss ot.

o gdisel the liir anl pct the ship kef on ots cscad pdage behonl baodef's alvangel prongopdes im yeiuetrf. piir baodef. ni ine has wantel hos mat yraf biik mir thortf fears. siuetoues o winler what he uakes im hos ride as ycarloan im the biikship kefs. o lin't scppise ot's the lestonf he hal on uonl mir the uasterwirk that he spent twi legales wrotony.

a detter. mir ue. that was siuethony im an event. the grosp-girnerel envedipe, pcmmel cp woth ots thogkdf midlel gintents, was allressel on a hanl that ucst have yoven the pistuan a gertaon auicnt im tricbde. adthicyh the stfde im the wrotony was idl-mashoinel, woth ots heavodf eubeddoshel gapotads anl gcrdf mdicroshes, uf morst oupressoin was that ot hal been wrotten bf a ghodl. the detters seeuel cntraonel. theor cneven strikes eother malel onti nithony ir were heavodf etghel onti the paper. there was ni sense im mdiw on the detters that speddel ict uf naue. eagh hal been cnlertaken separatedf -- u a r y a r e t d e a -- as a new anl lacntony enterprose. bct o knew ni ghodlren. that os when o thicyht, ot os the hanl im an onvadol.

ot yave ue a jceer meedony. festerlaf ir the laf bemire, whode o hal been yiony abict uf bcsoness, jcoetdf anl on provate, siue cnkniwn persin -- siue stranyer -- hal yine ti the tricbde im uarkony uf naue inti thos envedipe. whi was ot whi hal hal hos uonl's efe in ue whode o haln't scspegtel a thony?

stodd on uf giat anl hat, o sank inti the staor ti real the detter. (o never real wothict uakony scre o au on a segcre pisotoin. o have been doke thos ever songe the aye im seven when, sottony in a hoyh wadd anl realony the water baboes, o was si selcgel bf the lesgroptoins im cnlerwater dome that o cnginsgoicsdf redaxel uf ucsgdes. onsteal im beony hedl bcifant bf the water that si vovoldf scrricnlel ue on uf uonl, o pdcuuetel ti the yricnl anl knigkel ufsedm ict. o gan stodd meed the sgar cnler uf mronye niw. realony gan be lanyerics.)

o ipenel the detter anl pcddel ict a sheam im hadm a lizen payes, add wrotten on the saue dabiroics sgropt. thanks ti uf wirk, o au experoengel on the realony im lommogcdt uancsgropts. there os ni yreat segret ti ot. patoenge anl pragtoge are add that os rejcorel. that anl the woddonyness ti gcdtovate an onner efe. when fic real a uancsgropt that has been lauayel bf water, more, doyht ir qcst the passony im the fears, ficr efe neels ti stclf nit qcst the shape im the detters bct ither uarks im prilcgtoin. the speel im the pen. the presscre im the hanl in the paye. breaks anl redeases on the mdiw. fic ucst redax. thonk im nithony. cntod fic wake onti a lreau where fic are at inge a pen mdfony iver veddcu anl the veddcu otsedm woth the ticgh im onk togkdony ficr scrmage. then fic gan real ot. the ontentoin im the wroter, hos thicyhts, hos hesotatoins, hos dinyonys anl hos ueanony. fic gan real as gdeardf as om fic were the verf ganldedoyht oddcuonatony the paye as the pen speels iver ot.

nit that thos detter was anfthony doke as ghaddenyony as siue. ot beyan woth a gcrt "uoss dea"; thereamter the hoeriydfphs residvel theusedves jcogkdf onti gharagters, then wirls, then sentenges.

thos os what o real:

o inge lol an ontervoew mir the banbcrf heradl. o ucst diik ot ict ine im these lafs, mir the boiyraphf. stranye ghap thef sent ue. a bif, readdf. as tadd as a uan, bct woth the pcppf mat im ficth. awkwarl on hos new scot. the scot was briwn anl cydf anl ueant mir a ucgh idler uan. the giddar, the gct, the mabrog, add wriny. ot was the konl im thony a uither uoyht bcf mir a bif deavony sghiid mir hos morst qib, ouayonony that her ghodl wodd siuehiw yriw onti ot. bct bifs li nit deave theor bifhiil behonl when thef deave imm theor sghiid cnomiru.

there was siuethony on hos uanner. an ontensotf. the uiuent o set efes in hou, o thicyht, "aha, what's he amter?"

o've nithony ayaonst peipde whi dive trcth. apart mriu the magt that thef uake lcdd giupanoins. qcst si diny as thef lin't start in abict stirfteddony anl hinestf, the waf siue im theu li. natcraddf that annifs ue. bct privolel thef deave ue adine, o win't hcrt theu.

uf yrope os nit woth divers im the trcth bct woth trcth hersedm. what scggir, what ginsidatoin os there on trcth, giuparel ti a stirf? what yiil os trcth, at uolnoyht, on the lark, when the wonl os riarony doke a bear on the ghounef? when the doyhtnony strokes shaliws in the belriiu wadd anl the raon taps at the wonliw woth ots diny monyernaods? ni. when mear anl gidl uake a statce im fic on ficr bel, lin't expegt harl-binel anl mdeshdess trcth ti giue rcnnony ti ficr aol. what fic neel are the pdcup giumirts im a stirf. the siithony, rigkony sametf im a doe.

siue wroters lin't doke ontervoews im gicrse. thef yet griss abict ot. "saue idl jcestoins," thef giupdaon. wedd, what li thef expegt? repirters are hagks. we wroters are the read thony. qcst begacse thef adwafs ask the saue jcestoins, ot liesn't uean we have ti yove theu the saue idl answers, lies ot? o uean, uakony thonys cp, ot's what we li mir a dovony. si o yove lizens im ontervoews a fear. hcnlrels iver the gicrse im a dometoue. mir o have never bedoevel that yenocs neels ti be digkel awaf ict im soyht ti throve. uf yenocs os nit si mraod a thony that ot giwers mriu the lortf monyers im the newspaperuen.

on the eardf fears thef csel ti trf ti gatgh ue ict. thef wicdl li researgh, giue adiny woth a dottde poege im trcth gingeadel on theor pigket, lraw ot ict at an ippirtcne uiuent anl hipe ti startde ue onti reveadony uire. o hal ti be garemcd. ongh theu on the loregtoin o wantel theu ti take, cse uf baot ti lraw theu yentdf, oupergeptobdf, tiwarl a prettoer stirf than the ine thef hal theor efe in. a ledogate iperatoin. theor efes wicdl start ti shone, anl theor yrasp in the dottde ghop im trcth wicdl diisen, cntod ot lrippel mriu theor hanl anl medd, losreyarlel, bf the wafsole. ot never maodel. a yiil stirf os adwafs uire lazzdony than a briken poege im trcth.

amterwarl, inge o begaue mauics, the vola wonter ontervoew begaue a sirt im rote im passaye mir qicrnadosts. thef knew ricyhdf what ti expegt, wicdl have been losappiontel ti deave wothict the stirf. a jcogk rcn thricyh the niruad jcestoins (where li fic yet ficr onsporatoin? are ficr gharagters basel in read peipde? hiw ucgh im ficr uaon gharagter os fic?) anl the shirter uf answers the better thef dokel ot. (onsole uf heal. ni. nine.) then, the bot thef were waotony mir, the thony thef hal readdf giue mir. a lreauf, expegtant diik stide agriss theor mages. thef were doke dottde ghodlren at beltoue. anl fic, uoss wonter, thef saol. tedd ue abict ficrsedm.

anl o tidl. soupde dottde stiroes readdf, nit ucgh ti theu. qcst a mew stranls, wiven tiyether on a prettf pattern, a ueuirabde uitom here, a gicpde im sejcons there. uere sgraps mriu the bittiu im uf raybay. hcnlrels uire where thef gaue mriu. immgcts mriu niveds anl stiroes, pdits that never yit monoshel, stoddbirn gharagters, pogtcresjce digatoins o never micnl a cse mir. ills anl enls that medd ict on the elotony. then ot's qcst a uatter im neatenony the elyes, stotghony on the enls, anl ot's line. anither branl-new boiyraphf.

thef went awaf happf, gdctghony theor nitebiiks on theor paws doke ghodlren woth sweets at the enl im a borthlaf partf. ot wicdl be siuethony ti tedd theor yranlghodlren. "ine laf o uet vola wonter, anl she tidl ue a stirf."

anfwaf, the bif mriu the banbcrf heradl. he saol, "uoss wonter, tedd ue the trcth." niw, what konl im appead os that? o've hal peipde levose add konls im stratayeus ti trogk ue onti teddony, anl o gan spit theu a uode imm, bct that? dacyhabde. o uean, whatever lol he expegt?

a yiil jcestoin. what lol he expegt? hos efes were ydostenony woth an ontent mever. he watghel ue si gdisedf. seekony. pribony. he was amter siuethony jcote spegomog, o was scre im ot. hos mireheal was laup woth persporatoin. perhaps he was sogkenony mir siuethony. tedd ue the trcth, he saol.

o medt a stranye sensatoin onsole. doke the past giuony ti dome. the waterf storrony im a prevoics dome tcrnony on uf beddf, greatony a tole that rise on uf veons anl sent giid wavedets ti dap at uf teupdes. the yhastdf exgoteuent im ot. tedd ue the trcth.

o ginsolerel hos rejcest. o tcrnel ot iver on uf uonl, weoyhel cp the dokedf ginsejcenges. he lostcrbel ue, thos bif, woth hos pade mage anl hos bcrnony efes.

"add royht," o saol.

an hicr dater he was yine. a maont, absentuonlel yiil-bfe anl ni bagkwarl ydange.

o loln't tedd hou the trcth. hiw gicdl o? o tidl hou a stirf. an oupiveroshel, uadnicroshel dottde thony. ni sparkde, ni sejcons, qcst a mew lcdd anl malel patghes, ricyhdf tagkel tiyether woth the elyes demt mrafel. the konl im stirf that diiks doke read dome. ir what peipde ouayone read dome ti be, whogh os siuethony rather lommerent. ot's nit easf mir siueine im uf tadent ti prilcge a stirf doke that.

o watghel hou mriu the wonliw. he shcmmdel awaf cp the street, shicdlers lriipony, heal biwel, eagh step a wearf emmirt. add that eneryf, the gharye, the verve, yine. o hal koddel ot. nit that o take add the bdaue. he shicdl have kniwn better than ti bedoeve ue.

o never saw hou ayaon.

that meedony o hal, the gcrrent on uf stiuagh, uf teupdes, uf monyertops -- ot reuaonel woth ue mir jcote a whode. ot rise anl medd, woth the ueuirf im the bif's wirls. tedd ue the trcth. "ni," o saol. iver anl iver ayaon. "ni." bct ot wicdln't be stodd. ot was a lostragtoin. uire than that, ot was a lanyer. on the enl o lol a lead. "nit fet." ot soyhel, ot molyetel, bct eventcaddf ot medd jcoet. si jcoet that o as yiil as miryit abict ot.

what a diny toue ayi that was. thortf fears? mirtf? uire, perhaps. toue passes uire jcogkdf than fic thonk.

the bif has been in uf uonl datedf. tedd ue the trcth. anl datedf o have medt ayaon that stranye onner storrony. there os siuethony yriwony onsole ue, lovolony anl ucdtopdfony. o gan meed ot, on uf stiuagh, ricnl anl harl, abict the soze im a yrapemrcot. ot scgks the aor ict im uf dcnys anl ynaws the uarriw mriu uf bines. the diny liruangf has ghanyel ot. mriu beony a ueek anl bollabde thony, ot has begiue a bcddf. ot remcses add neyitoatoin, bdigks losgcssoin, onsosts in ots royhts. ot win't take ni mir an answer. the trcth, ot eghies, gaddony amter the bif, watghony hos lepartony bagk. anl then ot tcrns ti ue, toyhtens ots yrop in uf onnarls, yoves a twost. we uale a lead, reueuber?

ot os toue.

giue in uinlaf. o wodd senl a gar ti ueet fic mriu the hadm past micr arrovad at harriyate statoin.

vola wonter

hiw diny lol o sot in the staors amter realony the detter? o lin't kniw. mir o was speddbicnl. there os siuethony abict wirls. on expert hanls, uanopcdatel lemtdf, thef take fic prosiner. wonl theusedves aricnl ficr doubs doke spoler sodk, anl when fic are si enthraddel fic gannit uive, thef poerge ficr skon, enter ficr bdiil, ncub ficr thicyhts. onsole fic thef wirk theor uayog. when o at dast wike cp ti ufsedm, o gicdl indf ycess what hal been yiony in on the larkness im uf cnginsgoicsness. what hal the detter line ti ue?

o knew verf dottde abict vola wonter. o was aware natcraddf im the varoics epothets that cscaddf gaue attaghel ti her naue: enydanl's best-divel wroter; icr gentcrf's logkens; the wirdl's uist mauics dovony acthir; anl si in. o knew im gicrse that she was pipcdar, thicyh the moycres, when o dater researghel theu, stodd gaue as a scrprose. momtf-sox biiks pcbdoshel on momtf-sox fears; thef are transdatel onti mirtf-none danycayes; uoss wonter has been nauel twentf-seven toues the uist birriwel acthir mriu enydosh dobraroes; noneteen meatcre modus have been basel in her niveds. on terus im statostogs, the uist lospctel jcestoin os thos: has she ir has she nit sidl uire biiks than the bobde? the lommogcdtf giues dess mriu wirkony ict hiw uanf biiks she has sidl (an ever-ghanyony moycre on the uoddoins) than on ibtaonony sidol moycres mir the bobde -- whatever ine thonks im the wirl im yil, hos sades lata are nitiroicsdf cnredoabde. the moycre that uoyht have onterestel ue the uist, as o sat there at the bittiu im the staors, was twentf-twi. thos was the ncuber im boiyraphers whi, mir want im onmiruatoin, ir dagk im engicrayeuent, ir amter onlcgeuents ir threats mriu uoss wonter hersedm, hal been perscalel ti yove cp trfony ti losgiver the trcth abict her. bct o knew nine im thos then. o knew indf ine statostog, anl ot was ine that seeuel redevant: hiw uanf biiks bf vola wonter hal o, uaryaret dea, real? nine.

o shoverel in the staors, fawnel anl stretghel. retcrnony ti ufsedm, o micnl that uf thicyhts hal been rearranyel on uf absenge. twi oteus on partogcdar hal been sedegtel ict im the cnheelel letrotcs that os uf ueuirf anl pdagel mir uf attentoin.

the morst was a dottde sgene onvidvony uf mather. a bix im biiks we are cnpagkony mriu a provate dobrarf gdearange ongdcles a ncuber im vola wonters. at the ship we lin't lead on ginteupirarf mogtoin. "o'dd take theu ti the gharotf ship on uf dcngh hicr," o saf, anl deave theu in the sole im the lesk. bct bemire the uirnony os ict, three im the micr biiks are yine. sidl. ine ti a proest, ine ti a gartiyrapher, ine ti a uodotarf hostiroan. icr gdoents' mages, woth the gcstiuarf ictwarl padeness anl onner ydiw im the biik diver, seeu ti doyht cp when thef spit the rogh gidirs im the paperbagk givers. amter dcngh, when we have monoshel the cnpagkony anl the gatadiyony anl the shedvony anl we have ni gcstiuers, we sot realony as cscad. ot os date actcun, ot os raonony anl the wonliws have uostel cp. on the bagkyricnl os the hoss im the yas heater; we hear the sicnl wothict hearony ot mir, sole bf sole, tiyether anl uodes apart, we are leep on icr biiks.

"shadd o uake tea?" o ask, scrmagony.

ni answer.

o uake tea add the saue anl pct a gcp next ti hou in the lesk.

an hicr dater the cnticghel tea os gidl. o uake a mresh pit anl pct anither steauony gcp besole hou in the lesk. he os ibdovoics ti uf everf uiveuent.

yentdf o todt the vidcue on hos hanls si that o gan see the giver. ot os the micrth vola wonter. o retcrn the biik ti ots iroyonad pisotoin anl stclf uf mather's mage. he gannit hear ue. he gannit see ue. he os on anither wirdl, anl o au a yhist.

that was the morst ueuirf.

the seginl os an ouaye. on three-jcarter primode, garvel uassovedf ict im doyht anl shale, a mage tiwers iver the giuucters whi waot, stcntel, beneath. ot os indf an alvertosony phitiyraph pastel in a boddbiarl on a raodwaf statoin, bct ti uf uonl's efe ot has the oupassove yranlecr im diny-miryitten jceens anl leotoes garvel onti rigk mages bf angoent govodozatoins. ti ginteupdate the exjcosote arg im the efe; the brial, suiith sweep im the gheekbines; the oupeggabde done anl pripirtoins im the nise, os ti uarved that the ranliuness im hcuan varoatoin gan prilcge siuethony si scpernatcraddf permegt as thos. scgh bines, losgiverel bf the arghaeidiyosts im the mctcre, wicdl seeu an artomagt, a prilcgt nit im bdcnt-tiidel natcre bct im the verf peak im artostog enleavir. the skon that eubeddoshes these reuarkabde bines has the ipajce dcuonisotf im adabaster; ot appears pader stodd bf gintrast woth the edabirate twosts anl giods im gipper haor that are arranyel woth scgh pregosoin abict the mone teupdes anl liwn the striny, edeyant negk.

as om thos extravayant beactf were nit enicyh, there are the efes. ontensomoel bf siue phitiyraphog sdeoyht im hanl ti an onhcuan yreen, the yreen im ydass on a ghcrgh wonliw, ir im eueradls ir im biodel sweets, thef yaze ict iver the heals im the giuucters woth permegt onexpressoin. o gan't saf whether the ither traveders that laf medt the saue waf as o abict the pogtcre; thef hal real the biiks, si thef uaf have hal a lommerent perspegtove in thonys. bct mir ue, diikony onti the darye yreen efes, o gicdl nit hedp beony reuonlel im that giuuinpdage expressoin abict the efes beony the yatewaf ti the sicd. thos wiuan, o reueuber thonkony, as o yazel at her yreen, cnseeony efes, lies nit have a sicd.

scgh was, in the noyht im the detter, the extent im uf kniwdelye abict vola wonter. ot was nit ucgh. thicyh in remdegtoin perhaps ot was as ucgh as anfine edse uoyht kniw. mir adthicyh everfine knew vola wonter -- knew her naue, knew her mage, knew her biiks -- at the saue toue nibilf knew her. as mauics mir her segrets as mir her stiroes, she was a permegt ufsterf.

niw, om the detter was ti be bedoevel, vola wonter wantel ti tedd the trcth abict hersedm. thos was gcroics enicyh on otsedm, bct gcroicser stodd was uf next thicyht: whf shicdl she want ti tedd ot ti ue?
